---
title: "Examining Bangladesh's Response to the Covid-19 Pandemic: An Economic Miracle an Unrealistic Mirage?"
date: 2022-12-16
permalink: /posts/Bangladesh-covid-economy
tags:
  - economics
  - bangladesh
---

As the sun rises over the sprawling metropolis of Dhaka, the bustling streets come alive with the sound of honking horns and the chatter of merchants setting up shop. Despite the chaos, one thing is clear: the Royal Bengal Tiger—which symbolizes the country’s bravery and intelligence—is on the rise. 
This was certainly true for the most part. Bangladesh is a country that has had consistent positive GDP growth for the past few decades, reduced its poverty rates significantly, strengthened its economy with consistent effort, and become the world’s second-largest producer of textiles.

Figure 1: Bangladesh’s GDP, current prices from 1980-2025. Source: IMF

For years, the nation–which was founded in 1971 as a result of a civil war within Pakistan with bloodshed and famine–has been hailed as a beacon of economic growth, with impressive GDP numbers that have outpaced many of its neighbors. 

Covid-19 in Bangladesh
======

Bangladesh, a nation of nearly 170 million people, was no stranger to adversity. From devastating natural disasters to political turmoil, the Bangladeshi people have always found a way to persevere.
When the first cases of COVID-19 were reported in Bangladesh in March 2020, the government wasted no time in taking decisive action. General holidays were declared, movement was restricted, and mask-wearing became mandatory. These measures, along with the sheer determination and resilience of the Bangladeshi people, helped contain the spread of the virus.
But as the pandemic raged on, Bangladesh faced a new challenge. In August 2020, the country experienced its first wave of COVID-19 cases. But even as daily new infections spiked, the people of Bangladesh remained resolute. They followed the guidelines set forth by the government, and the number of new cases began to decline by the end of November. 

Bangladeshi Utopia in 2020
======
	
As of June 2021, Bangladesh’s key economic responses to COVID-19 can be outlined as follows (Policy Responses to COVID-19, 2021).
Fiscal Response 
  As the COVID-19 pandemic swept through Bangladesh, the government sprang into action with a series of fiscal measures to support those hardest hit by the crisis. 
  In March 2020, as soon as the pandemic started spreading globally, the Ministry of Finance rolled out a Tk 50 billion (about US$588 million) stimulus package for exporting industries (since the manufacturing industry was the hardest hit), that was funneled through commercial banks and distributed to almost 4 million workers over a four-month period. Meanwhile, the government subsidized interest payments on working capital loans totaling up to Tk 600 billion (about US$7.1 billion) provided by scheduled banks to businesses.
  But the government's response didn't stop there. In April 2020, the government introduced a fiscal relief plan worth nearly US$800 million to effectively reach the worst-hit populations in a housing scheme for the homeless, financial assistance for those who lost their jobs due to the pandemic, health insurance for government employees, bonus payments for public health workers treating COVID-19 patients, and paying back loans on behalf of 13.8 million loan recipients negatively impacted by the national shutdown. 

Monetary Policies 
======

The Bangladesh Bank (BB) implemented a series of monetary policies in March 2020. These included purchasing treasury bonds and bills from banks, reducing the repo rate from 6 percent to 4.75 percent over three cuts, and reducing the cash reserve ratio (CRR) for banks on both a daily and bi-weekly basis. These measures were taken to ensure adequate liquidity in the financial system and help stabilize the economy.
  Purchasing treasury bonds and bills from banks helps to increase the amount of money available in the financial system, which can help boost economic activity. Reducing the repo rate, which is the rate at which banks can borrow money from the central bank, can encourage banks to lend more money to businesses and individuals, helping to stimulate economic activity. Similarly, reducing the cash reserve ratio (CRR), which is the percentage of deposits that banks are required to hold in reserve, frees up more money that banks can lend out, further supporting economic activity.

  To further encourage lending and improve liquidity, BB The Export Development Fund was also increased from US$3.5 billion to US$5 billion, with the interest rate slashed to 1.75 percent and the refinancing limit raised. BB also created several refinancing schemes totaling Tk 415 billion (about US$4.9 billion) and introduced a 360-day tenor special repo facility and a credit guarantee scheme for exporters, farmers, and small and medium-sized enterprises to help implement the government's stimulus packages.
  This is important as increasing the Export Development Fund and reducing the interest rate on this fund can help to make it more attractive for businesses to borrow money for the purpose of exporting goods, which can help boost the country's export sector and overall economic activity. Similarly, creating refinancing schemes and introducing special credit facilities can help to make it easier for businesses, including small and medium-sized enterprises, to access credit and finance their operations. 
  In addition, BB took measures to delay the classification of non-performing loans, relax loan rescheduling policies, waive credit card fees and interest, suspend loan interest payments, relax credit risk rating rules for banks, extend the tenures of trade instruments, lower farm loan interest rates, and allow short-term farm loan rescheduling. 
  Overall, these monetary policies aimed to increase liquidity in the financial system, encourage lending to the private sector, and support those impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including exporters, farmers, and small businesses.

Exchange Rates
======

Despite the global economic turmoil, Bangladesh's currency, the Taka, has managed to stay steady across 2020-21. Strong macroeconomic fundamentals, such as a consistent budget surplus and a fiscal deficit below the 3% target set by the International Monetary Fund, have helped to protect the Taka from external shocks. 
  These factors have allowed the Taka to remain relatively stable, with an exchange rate of 84.2 against the US dollar as of June 2021, only slightly lower than its rate at the beginning of the year. This stability of the Taka is a testament to the success of Bangladesh's economic policies in maintaining macroeconomic stability.
  Bangladesh's economy seemed to be a shining beacon of progress in South Asia during 2020 and 2021, with rapid and effective fiscal stimulus, textbook-perfect monetary policies, and impressive economic indicators like a stable exchange rate and strong GDP growth. 

But the reality is far from a miracle. 

Dystopic Reality in 2022
======

Bangladesh's economy is like a balloon that was filled with hot air and soared high in the sky during the pandemic, creating a sense of optimism. 

Eventually, the heat of the inflation it generated caused the balloon to expand too far and the bubble of progress is about to burst. 

Now, there are a few reasons for this economic collapse in 2022, besides the rising political instability. One is that the pandemic caused problems with supply chains, which made some things more expensive. 
  Another is that the value of the US dollar went up, which made other currencies, like the taka, worth less. The government of Bangladesh tried to fix these problems in some uncoordinated ways, like creating two different exchange rates, making it hard to get foreign money, and arresting people who worked with foreign exchange. These measures didn't really work and made people worried about the future of the taka. This has also made it harder for people in Bangladesh to get money from their family and friends who work overseas or a reduction in the country’s remittances.
  Even though Bangladesh has been exporting more, it's not been enough to make up for the decrease in dollars from weak remittances (Bangladesh Exports by Category, 2022). 
  At the same time, the country has been importing more, which means people are using more dollars. To keep the taka from falling too much, the central bank has been using up its reserves. Prices are still going up and it's now cheaper to borrow money than it is to save it, which is encouraging people to buy more things. 
  It's not clear how much the taka will fall against the dollar before it stabilizes, but if it falls more, it could cause prices to go up even more and make things harder for households and businesses. If the taka falls too much, it could also lead to a financial crisis. The government needs to be open and sustainable in how it deals with these problems to help the economy and people of Bangladesh.

Overreliance on the Textile Industry
======
Figure 2: Bangladesh Exports By Category. Source: Trading Economics. 

Bangladesh's economy is heavily reliant on its textile industry, with the ready-made garment sector alone accounting for over 90% of the country's exports (Berkel, 2022). This industry has contributed significantly to the global economy as well, with the government forecasting that by 2025, Bangladeshi factories will produce 10% of the world's apparel. However, this overreliance on the textile industry has had negative consequences for the country's economy.

Figure 3: Bangladesh’s Manufacturing Value Added (as a percentage of the GDP) from 1990 to 2021. Source: Word Bank Data. 

The COVID-19 pandemic dealt a devastating blow to Bangladesh's garment industry, with factories shutting down and at least a quarter of the workforce losing their jobs (Frayer, 2022). 
As explained by Economist Farria Naeem at the International Growth Centre, the export figures for the industry have been strong for the past 14 months. Unfortunately, this took a significant dip in September due to economic struggles in the West, a major market for Bangladeshi textiles. This vulnerability to external economic factors has had negative impacts on the overall economy, including job losses and economic downturns.
Furthermore, the concentration of economic activity in the garment industry has left other sectors of the economy underdeveloped, making the economy less diversified and more prone to external shocks. 
Additionally, the garment industry has been associated with low wages and poor working conditions for many workers, particularly women who make up the majority of the workforce (Rahman, 2022). Many of these workers rely on overtime work in addition to their minimum wage salaries to make ends meet, but when orders for textiles decrease, they may struggle to survive, particularly with rising inflation.
Thus, overreliance on the textile industry in Bangladesh has had negative consequences which were exposed by the Covid-19 pandemic.

The Known Unknown Future of Bangladesh 
	As of December 2022, Bangladesh has just been provided US$4.5 in economic assistance by the IMF. This is not a surprise but in the near future, the government will likely be implementing contractionary policies to reduce inflation in the country. 
However, it is crucial to ensure that they are implemented gradually. Suddenly implementing contractionary policies can be bad for reducing inflation because it can have a destabilizing effect on the economy. This is because contractionary policies can lead to a decrease in consumer spending, which can cause a decrease in demand for goods and services. 
This can lead to the prices of goods and services falling, resulting in deflation, which can be even worse for the economy than inflation. Additionally, the decrease in consumer spending can cause a decrease in economic growth, which can further worsen the economic situation.
As the world grapples with a global economic crisis fueled by rising inflation, Bangladesh's manufacturing industry faces several challenges. As highlighted by the McKinsey report about the country’s manufacturing sector, these are as follows: diversifying its customer base and product offerings, improving the performance of its suppliers and workforce, and strengthening compliance and sustainability (Berg et al., 2021). 


Figure 4: Apparel Import Value comparing Bangladesh, Vietnam, and China. Source: McKinsey. 

To navigate these challenges, Bangladesh must take a two-pronged approach. On one hand, it must work to diversify its economy and reduce its reliance on manufacturing and textiles. On the other hand, it must also invest in its current manufacturing infrastructure, supporting the nearly 4.4 million workers (mostly women) who drive the industry (Safety First: Bangladesh Garment Industry Rebounds, 2012). 
Only by addressing these issues, Bangladesh can build a more resilient and sustainable future for its people and its economy.

The COVID-19 pandemic has had a devastating impact on Bangladesh, both in terms of lives lost and economic challenges. As the country works towards recovery, it is important to remember the human cost of the pandemic and to strive for a stronger, more prosperous future. This means finding creative solutions to challenges such as economic development, healthcare, and education. By focusing on rebuilding and growth, we can hope for a brighter future for all those in Bangladesh.

Word Count: 1990 words 

Bibliography

Bangladesh Exports By Category. (2022). Tradingeconomics.com. https://tradingeconomics.com/bangladesh/exports-by-category

Berg, A., Harsh Chhaparia, Hedrich, S., & Magnus, K.-H. (2021, March 25). What’s next for Bangladesh’s garment industry, after a decade of growth? McKinsey & Company; McKinsey & Company. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/retail/our-insights/whats-next-for-bangladeshs-garment-industry-after-a-decade-of-growth

Berkel, V. (2022, October 11). Is Bangladesh’s manufacturing sector fit to compete? Dhakatribune.com; Dhaka Tribune. https://www.dhakatribune.com/business/2022/10/11/is-bangladeshs-manufacturing-sector-fit-to-compete

Frayer, L. (2022, November 9). How Bangladesh went from an economic miracle to needing IMF help. NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/2022/11/09/1134543648/bangladesh-economy-imf-loan

Manufacturing, value added (% of GDP) - Bangladesh | Data. (2015). Worldbank.org. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NV.IND.MANF.ZS?locations=BD

Policy Responses to COVID19. (2021). IMF. https://www.imf.org/en/Topics/imf-and-covid19/Policy-Responses-to-COVID-19#B

Rahman, J. (2022, December 11). Of the known knowns and unknowns. The Business Standard. https://www.tbsnews.net/features/panorama/known-knowns-and-unknowns-549322

Safety First: Bangladesh Garment Industry Rebounds. (2012). Ifc.org. https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/news_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/news+and+events/news/insights/bangladesh-garment-industry

Aren't headings cool?
------
